README.md, before:

# 🎓 RFID-Based Attendance Management System

[![PHP](https://img.shields.io/badge/PHP-7.4+-777BB4?style=flat&logo=php&logoColor=white)](https://www.php.net/)
[![MySQL](https://img.shields.io/badge/MySQL-5.7+-4479A1?style=flat&logo=mysql&logoColor=white)](https://www.mysql.com/)
[![Arduino](https://img.shields.io/badge/Arduino-Compatible-00979D?style=flat&logo=arduino&logoColor=white)](https://www.arduino.cc/)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-green.svg)](LICENSE)

A comprehensive web-based attendance management system using RFID technology for automated student attendance tracking. Built for educational institutions to streamline attendance recording, monitoring, and reporting.

## ✨ Features

### 🔐 Admin Features
- **User Management**: Add, edit, and delete student records
- **Course Management**: Create and manage courses, sections, and batches
- **Device Management**: Configure and monitor RFID readers
- **Room & Batch Assignment**: Link rooms with devices and student batches
- **Session Management**: Create manual or automatic class sessions
- **Attendance Reports**: 
  - View real-time attendance
  - Generate attendance summaries
  - Export to Excel, CSV, and PDF formats
- **Weekly Routines**: Auto-generate class schedules
- **User Activity Logs**: Track system usage and changes

### 📊 Attendance Features
- Automatic attendance recording via RFID
- Real-time attendance monitoring
- Session-based attendance tracking
- Attendance percentage calculation
- Course-wise attendance reports
- Auto-close expired sessions

### 🔧 Technical Features
- Responsive web interface
- Secure authentication system
- Database-driven architecture
- AJAX-powered real-time updates
- Export functionality (Excel, CSV, PDF)
- Automated session cleanup

## 🏗️ System Architecture

```
┌─────────────┐      ┌──────────────┐      ┌─────────────┐
│   RFID      │─────▶│   Arduino    │─────▶│  Web Server │
│   Tags      │      │   Reader     │      │   (PHP)     │
└─────────────┘      └──────────────┘      └──────┬──────┘
                                                   │
                                                   ▼
                                            ┌─────────────┐
                                            │   MySQL     │
                                            │  Database   │
                                            └─────────────┘
```

## 📋 Prerequisites

Before you begin, ensure you have the following installed:

- **Web Server**: Apache (XAMPP, WAMP, or LAMP)
- **PHP**: Version 7.4 or higher
- **MySQL**: Version 5.7 or higher
- **Arduino IDE**: For programming the RFID reader (if using hardware)
- **RFID Reader**: RC522 or compatible
- **Modern Web Browser**: Chrome, Firefox, Edge, or Safari

## 🚀 Installation

### Step 1: Clone the Repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/Kowshik08004/ETE-320-project.git
cd ETE-320-project
```

### Step 2: Setup Database

1. Start your MySQL server (via XAMPP/WAMP)
2. Open phpMyAdmin (http://localhost/phpmyadmin)
3. Create a new database named `rfidattendance`
4. Import the database schema:
   - Click on the `rfidattendance` database
   - Go to the **Import** tab
   - Select `rfidattendance.sql` file
   - Click **Go**

### Step 3: Configure Database Connection

1. Open `connectDB.php` in a text editor
2. Update the database credentials:

```php
$servername = "localhost";
$username = "root";        // Your MySQL username
$password = "";            // Your MySQL password
$dbname = "rfidattendance";
```

### Step 4: Deploy Application

1. Copy the project folder to your web server's root directory:
   - **XAMPP**: `C:\xampp\htdocs\`
   - **WAMP**: `C:\wamp64\www\`
   - **LAMP**: `/var/www/html/`

2. Ensure proper file permissions (Linux/Mac):
```bash
sudo chmod -R 755 /var/www/html/ETE-320-project
```

### Step 5: Access the Application

1. Open your web browser
2. Navigate to: `http://localhost/ETE-320-project`
3. Login with default credentials:
   - **Email**: `admin@gmail.com`
   - **Password**: `admin` (or check the SQL dump for the hashed password)

> ⚠️ **Important**: Change the default admin password immediately after first login!

## 🔌 Hardware Setup (Optional)

If you're using the physical RFID system:

### Components Needed
- Arduino Uno/Nano
- RC522 RFID Reader Module
- RFID Cards/Tags
- Connecting Wires
- USB Cable

### Wiring Diagram

| RC522 Pin | Arduino Pin |
|-----------|-------------|
| SDA       | D10         |
| SCK       | D13         |
| MOSI      | D11         |
| MISO      | D12         |
| IRQ       | Not Connected |
| GND       | GND         |
| RST       | D9          |
| 3.3V      | 3.3V        |

### Upload Arduino Code

1. Open Arduino IDE
2. Install required library: **MFRC522** (Tools → Manage Libraries → Search "MFRC522")
3. Open `RFID/RFID.ino`
4. Select your board and port
5. Upload the sketch

## 📖 Usage Guide

### For Administrators

1. **Add Students**
   - Navigate to "Manage Users"
   - Click "Add New Student"
   - Enter student details and RFID card number
   - Save

2. **Create Course Sessions**
   - Go to "Course Sessions"
   - Select course, room, and time
   - Create session (manual or automatic)

3. **View Attendance**
   - Navigate to "Attendance View"
   - Select course and date range
   - View or export reports

4. **Setup Weekly Routines**
   - Go to "Weekly Routines"
   - Configure class schedules
   - Enable auto-generation

### For Students

- Simply tap your RFID card on the reader when entering class
- Attendance is automatically recorded
- No manual login required

## 📁 Project Structure

```
ETE-320-project/
│
├── RFID/                          # Arduino code for RFID reader
│   ├── RFID.ino
│   └── rfid_attendance/           # KiCad PCB design files
│
├── js/                            # JavaScript files
│   ├── jquery-2.2.3.min.js
│   ├── bootstrap.js
│   └── *.js                       # Custom scripts
│
├── icons/                         # UI icons
│
├── css/                           # Stylesheets
│
├── *.php                          # PHP application files
│   ├── index.php                  # Main dashboard
│   ├── login.php                  # Authentication
│   ├── connectDB.php              # Database connection
│   ├── ManageUsers.php            # User management
│   ├── ManageCourses.php          # Course management
│   ├── attendance_view.php        # Attendance reports
│   └── ...                        # Other modules
│
├── rfidattendance.sql             # Database schema
├── composer.json                   # PHP dependencies
└── README.md                      # This file
```

## 🔒 Security Features

- ✅ Session-based authentication
- ✅ Admin guard middleware
- ✅ Password hashing (bcrypt)
- ✅ SQL injection prevention
- ✅ XSS protection
- ✅ CSRF token validation (recommended to implement)

## 🐛 Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

**Database Connection Failed**
- Check MySQL service is running
- Verify credentials in `connectDB.php`
- Ensure database `rfidattendance` exists

**RFID Not Reading**
- Check Arduino connections
- Verify COM port in Arduino IDE
- Test RFID cards are not damaged
- Ensure MFRC522 library is installed

**Attendance Not Recording**
- Verify student RFID is registered in database
- Check active session exists for the course
- Ensure device is linked to correct room

**Export Not Working**
- Check PHP extensions: `php_zip`, `php_excel`
- Verify write permissions on export directory
- Check PHP memory limit in `php.ini`

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please follow these steps:

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/AmazingFeature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add some AmazingFeature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/AmazingFeature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

## 📝 Development Roadmap

- [ ] Add SMS/Email notifications for absent students
- [ ] Implement facial recognition as alternative to RFID
- [ ] Create mobile app for students
- [ ] Add biometric authentication
- [ ] Real-time analytics dashboard
- [ ] Multi-language support
- [ ] RESTful API for third-party integrations

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## 👥 Authors

- **Your Name** - *Initial work* - [YourGitHub](https://github.com/yourusername)

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- CUET ETE-320 Course Project
- MFRC522 Library developers
- Bootstrap framework
- All contributors and testers

## 📧 Contact

For questions or support, please contact:
- **Email**: u2108004@cuet.ac.bd
- **Project Link**: [https://github.com/Kowshik08004/ETE-320-project](https://github.com/Kowshik08004/ETE-320-project)

---

<div align="center">

**Made with ❤️ for Education**

⭐ Star this repo if you find it helpful!

</div>

Commit message:

Update README and add system diagrams
Added system architecture and wiring diagram images to the screenshots directory and referenced them in the README. Updated admin password, author information, and contact email in the documentation.

README.md, after:

# 🎓 RFID-Based Attendance Management System

[![PHP](https://img.shields.io/badge/PHP-7.4+-777BB4?style=flat&logo=php&logoColor=white)](https://www.php.net/)
[![MySQL](https://img.shields.io/badge/MySQL-5.7+-4479A1?style=flat&logo=mysql&logoColor=white)](https://www.mysql.com/)
[![Arduino](https://img.shields.io/badge/Arduino-Compatible-00979D?style=flat&logo=arduino&logoColor=white)](https://www.arduino.cc/)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-green.svg)](LICENSE)

A comprehensive web-based attendance management system using RFID technology for automated student attendance tracking. Built for educational institutions to streamline attendance recording, monitoring, and reporting.

## ✨ Features

### 🔐 Admin Features
- **User Management**: Add, edit, and delete student records
- **Course Management**: Create and manage courses, sections, and batches
- **Device Management**: Configure and monitor RFID readers
- **Room & Batch Assignment**: Link rooms with devices and student batches
- **Session Management**: Create manual or automatic class sessions
- **Attendance Reports**: 
  - View real-time attendance
  - Generate attendance summaries
  - Export to Excel, CSV, and PDF formats
- **Weekly Routines**: Auto-generate class schedules
- **User Activity Logs**: Track system usage and changes

### 📊 Attendance Features
- Automatic attendance recording via RFID
- Real-time attendance monitoring
- Session-based attendance tracking
- Attendance percentage calculation
- Course-wise attendance reports
- Auto-close expired sessions

### 🔧 Technical Features
- Responsive web interface
- Secure authentication system
- Database-driven architecture
- AJAX-powered real-time updates
- Export functionality (Excel, CSV, PDF)
- Automated session cleanup

## 🏗️ System Architecture

```
┌─────────────┐      ┌──────────────┐      ┌─────────────┐
│   RFID      │─────▶│   Arduino    │─────▶│  Web Server │
│   Tags      │      │   Reader     │      │   (PHP)     │
└─────────────┘      └──────────────┘      └──────┬──────┘
                                                   │
                                                   ▼
                                            ┌─────────────┐
                                            │   MySQL     │
                                            │  Database   │
                                            └─────────────┘
```

![System Architecture Diagram](screenshots/system-architecture.png)

## 📋 Prerequisites

Before you begin, ensure you have the following installed:

- **Web Server**: Apache (XAMPP, WAMP, or LAMP)
- **PHP**: Version 7.4 or higher
- **MySQL**: Version 5.7 or higher
- **Arduino IDE**: For programming the RFID reader (if using hardware)
- **RFID Reader**: RC522 or compatible
- **Modern Web Browser**: Chrome, Firefox, Edge, or Safari

## 🚀 Installation

### Step 1: Clone the Repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/Kowshik08004/ETE-320-project.git
cd ETE-320-project
```

### Step 2: Setup Database

1. Start your MySQL server (via XAMPP/WAMP)
2. Open phpMyAdmin (http://localhost/phpmyadmin)
3. Create a new database named `rfidattendance`
4. Import the database schema:
   - Click on the `rfidattendance` database
   - Go to the **Import** tab
   - Select `rfidattendance.sql` file
   - Click **Go**

### Step 3: Configure Database Connection

1. Open `connectDB.php` in a text editor
2. Update the database credentials:

```php
$servername = "localhost";
$username = "root";        // Your MySQL username
$password = "";            // Your MySQL password
$dbname = "rfidattendance";
```

### Step 4: Deploy Application

1. Copy the project folder to your web server's root directory:
   - **XAMPP**: `C:\xampp\htdocs\`
   - **WAMP**: `C:\wamp64\www\`
   - **LAMP**: `/var/www/html/`

2. Ensure proper file permissions (Linux/Mac):
```bash
sudo chmod -R 755 /var/www/html/ETE-320-project
```

### Step 5: Access the Application

1. Open your web browser
2. Navigate to: `http://localhost/ETE-320-project`
3. Login with default credentials:
   - **Email**: `admin@gmail.com`
   - **Password**: `123` (or check the SQL dump for the hashed password)

> ⚠️ **Important**: Change the default admin password immediately after first login!

## 🔌 Hardware Setup (Optional)

If you're using the physical RFID system:

### Components Needed
- Arduino Uno/Nano
- RC522 RFID Reader Module
- RFID Cards/Tags
- Connecting Wires
- USB Cable

### Wiring Diagram

| RC522 Pin | Arduino Pin |
|-----------|-------------|
| SDA       | D10         |
| SCK       | D13         |
| MOSI      | D11         |
| MISO      | D12         |
| IRQ       | Not Connected |
| GND       | GND         |
| RST       | D9          |
| 3.3V      | 3.3V        |

![RC522 Wiring Table](screenshots/rc522-wiring-table.png)

### Upload Arduino Code

1. Open Arduino IDE
2. Install required library: **MFRC522** (Tools → Manage Libraries → Search "MFRC522")
3. Open `RFID/RFID.ino`
4. Select your board and port
5. Upload the sketch

## 📖 Usage Guide

### For Administrators

1. **Add Students**
   - Navigate to "Manage Users"
   - Click "Add New Student"
   - Enter student details and RFID card number
   - Save

2. **Create Course Sessions**
   - Go to "Course Sessions"
   - Select course, room, and time
   - Create session (manual or automatic)

3. **View Attendance**
   - Navigate to "Attendance View"
   - Select course and date range
   - View or export reports

4. **Setup Weekly Routines**
   - Go to "Weekly Routines"
   - Configure class schedules
   - Enable auto-generation

### For Students

- Simply tap your RFID card on the reader when entering class
- Attendance is automatically recorded
- No manual login required

## 📁 Project Structure

```
ETE-320-project/
│
├── RFID/                          # Arduino code for RFID reader
│   ├── RFID.ino
│   └── rfid_attendance/           # KiCad PCB design files
│
├── js/                            # JavaScript files
│   ├── jquery-2.2.3.min.js
│   ├── bootstrap.js
│   └── *.js                       # Custom scripts
│
├── icons/                         # UI icons
│
├── css/                           # Stylesheets
│
├── *.php                          # PHP application files
│   ├── index.php                  # Main dashboard
│   ├── login.php                  # Authentication
│   ├── connectDB.php              # Database connection
│   ├── ManageUsers.php            # User management
│   ├── ManageCourses.php          # Course management
│   ├── attendance_view.php        # Attendance reports
│   └── ...                        # Other modules
│
├── rfidattendance.sql             # Database schema
├── composer.json                   # PHP dependencies
└── README.md                      # This file
```

## 🔒 Security Features

- ✅ Session-based authentication
- ✅ Admin guard middleware
- ✅ Password hashing (bcrypt)
- ✅ SQL injection prevention
- ✅ XSS protection
- ✅ CSRF token validation (recommended to implement)

## 🐛 Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

**Database Connection Failed**
- Check MySQL service is running
- Verify credentials in `connectDB.php`
- Ensure database `rfidattendance` exists

**RFID Not Reading**
- Check Arduino connections
- Verify COM port in Arduino IDE
- Test RFID cards are not damaged
- Ensure MFRC522 library is installed

**Attendance Not Recording**
- Verify student RFID is registered in database
- Check active session exists for the course
- Ensure device is linked to correct room

**Export Not Working**
- Check PHP extensions: `php_zip`, `php_excel`
- Verify write permissions on export directory
- Check PHP memory limit in `php.ini`

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please follow these steps:

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/AmazingFeature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add some AmazingFeature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/AmazingFeature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

## 📝 Development Roadmap

- [ ] Add SMS/Email notifications for absent students
- [ ] Implement facial recognition as alternative to RFID
- [ ] Create mobile app for students
- [ ] Add biometric authentication
- [ ] Real-time analytics dashboard
- [ ] Multi-language support
- [ ] RESTful API for third-party integrations

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## 👥 Authors

- **Kowshik Chowdhury** - [GitHub](https://github.com/Kowshik08004)

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- CUET ETE-320 Course Project
- MFRC522 Library developers
- Bootstrap framework
- All contributors and testers

## 📧 Contact

For questions or support, please contact:
- **Email**: u2108004@student.cuet.ac.bd
- **Project Link**: [https://github.com/Kowshik08004/ETE-320-project](https://github.com/Kowshik08004/ETE-320-project)

---

<div align="center">

⭐ Star this repo if you find it helpful!

</div>
